

Venkatraman2011 - PLS-UPA behaviour in the presence of substrate competition

The posibility of ultrasensitivity and bistable activation of PLS (Plasmin)
and UPA (Urokinase-type plasminogen activator) in the presence of substrate
competition is explained here using a mathematical model.

This model is described in the article:

[Steady states and dynamics of urokinase-mediated plasmin activation in silico
and in vitro.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/22004735)

Venkatraman L, Li H, Dewey CF Jr, White JK, Bhowmick SS, Yu H, Tucker-Kellogg
L.

Biophys J. 2011 Oct 19;101(8):1825-34.

Abstract:

Plasmin (PLS) and urokinase-type plasminogen activator (UPA) are ubiquitous
proteases that regulate the extracellular environment. Although they are
secreted in inactive forms, they can activate each other through proteolytic
cleavage. This mutual interplay creates the potential for complex dynamics,
which we investigated using mathematical modeling and in vitro experiments. We
constructed ordinary differential equations to model the conversion of
precursor plasminogen into active PLS, and precursor urokinase (scUPA) into
active urokinase (tcUPA). Although neither PLS nor UPA exhibits allosteric
cooperativity, modeling showed that cooperativity occurred at the system level
because of substrate competition. Computational simulations and bifurcation
analysis predicted that the system would be bistable over a range of
parameters for cooperativity and positive feedback. Cell-free experiments with
recombinant proteins tested key predictions of the model. PLS activation in
response to scUPA stimulus was found to be cooperative in vitro. Finally,
bistability was demonstrated in vitro by the presence of two significantly
different steady-state levels of PLS activation for the same levels of
stimulus. We conclude that ultrasensitive, bistable activation of UPA-PLS is
possible in the presence of substrate competition. An ultrasensitive threshold
for activation of PLS and UPA would have ramifications for normal and disease
processes, including angiogenesis, metastasis, wound healing, and fibrosis.

The cooperativity parameter "ci" was missing in the original model. The
parameter "ci" has been added to the added.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1303130001](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1303130001) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

